plutus ctl comparative example (#469)
Plutonomicon/cardano-transaction-lib: doc/side-by-side-CTL-and-Plutus-comparison.md

# Side by side comparison of CTL and Plutus off-chain contracts

We are going to compare two different off-chain contracts 
both in Plutus and CTL. 

For this discussion, we need to go through an overview of 
both of them.

## About `Contract` in CTL and Plutus

The purpose of `Contract` in CTL is to bring the capabilities of 
`QueryMExtended` to the public API. 

The current definition of `Contract` in CTL is :

```PureScript
type QueryConfig (r :: Row Type) =
  { some_internal_parameters 
  | r
  }

type DefaultQueryConfig = QueryConfig ()

type QueryM (a :: Type) = ReaderT DefaultQueryConfig (LoggerT Aff) a

type QueryMExtended (r :: Row Type) (a :: Type) =
  ReaderT 
    (QueryConfig r)
    (LoggerT Aff)
    a

newtype Contract (r :: Row Type) (a :: Type) = Contract (QueryMExtended r a)
```

In CTL we have a general environment type `forall r . QueryConfig r`, it stores
the needed parameters to connect to an `Ogmios` server  and
uses the PureScript native row polymorphism to make it extensible for both 

> CTL developers and users.

Reviewer: Let's be specific that it is the `r :: Row Type` that allows this extensibility as not everyone will be familiar with this.

Author: I'm not sure how to add this to the document without going into a discussion about `Haskell` vs `PS` type systems instead of `Plutus` vs `CTL`, so I just add a Wikipedia link and a link to [other source ](https://hgiasac.github.io/posts/2018-11-18-Record-Row-Type-and-Row-Polymorphism.html)

The parameter `a` as in `Plutus` refers to a return value wrapped by `Contract`.

Note that in Plutus right now we have the following definition for `Contract`:

```Haskell
type ContractEffs w e =
    '[ Error e
    ,  LogMsg Value
    ,  Writer w
    ,  Checkpoint
    ,  Resumable PABResp PABReq
    ]

type ContractEnv = (IterationID, RequestID)

newtype Contract w (s :: Row *) e a = Contract { unContract :: Eff (ContractEffs w e) a }
  deriving newtype (Functor, Applicative, Monad)
```

The Plutus `Contract` environment is specialized to just two values and is fixed. 
Also, Plutus `Contract` uses a phantom type `s` to contract schema 
and parameters `w` for a writer and `e` for errors. 
In the case of CTL we don't have the contract schema parameter or the writer 
parameter since CTL definition allows performing arbitrary effects. 
This is possible  since the definition of `LoggerT` is: 

```PureScript
newtype LoggerT m a = LoggerT ((Message -> m Unit) -> m a)
```

> The use of `Aff` inside `LoggerT` allows us to use asynchronous effects 

Reviewer: We could easily remove `LoggerT` and the stack would still hold (up to logging changes). You can use `Effect.Class.Console (log)` to log to console.

There is no need for writer as we can perform arbitrary async. effects since we have `Aff` at the bottom of the stack?

in Haskell, although isn't the same.

## Contract comparison

We can now begin to compare contracts. 

The most famous contracts are those contained as part of 
the [Plutus pioneer program](https://plutus-pioneer-program.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pioneer/week2.html) in week2. Both of them use the same on-chain contract that 
allows an arbitrary datum and arbitrary redeemer. 

### Signature and submit 

We are going to need the auxiliary PureScript function that isn't part 
of CTL: 

```PureScript
buildBalanceSignAndSubmitTx
  :: Lookups.ScriptLookups PlutusData
  -> TxConstraints Unit Unit
  -> Contract () TransactionHash
buildBalanceSignAndSubmitTx lookups constraints = do
  ubTx <- liftedE $ Lookups.mkUnbalancedTx lookups constraints
  BalancedSignedTransaction bsTx <-
    liftedM "Failed to balance/sign tx" $ balanceAndSignTx ubTx
  txId <- submit bsTx.signedTxCbor
  logInfo' $ "Tx ID: " <> show txId
  pure txId
```

This function takes our lookups and constraints, then constructs
an unbalanced transaction using them, after that it tries to balance 
the transaction and attempts to get a signature for this transaction, then it 

> submits the transaction and if all got right, it returns the Id

Author: In the end, I write a list of actions being performed and then write about the kind of errors that could happen here.

for the transaction wrapped inside the `Contract`. 

This is a separate function as is almost boilerplate once we 
have set our environment.

We can see this function as a more explicit version of the 
process made by Plutus with the `submitTx` function: 

```Haskell 
-- | Build a transaction that satisfies the constraints, then submit it to 
-- | the network. The constraints do not refer to any 
-- | typed script inputs or outputs.
submitTx 
  :: forall w s e. AsContractError e 
    => TxConstraints Void Void -> Contract w s e CardanoTx
```

A major difference in both functions is the fact that we 
are also signing the transaction as part of the balance of 
the transaction.

### MustPayTo functions

In the case of Plutus `Contract`, we use the function 
`mustPayToOtherScript`, according to Plutus ledger, it :

```Haskell

> -- | mustPayToOtherScript vh d v locks the value v with the given script 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-- | `mustPayToOtherScript vh d v` locks the value v with the given script 
```

Please also backtick-quote all variable names.

Author: I have my doubts here since I now copying the comments from the source and it uses the haddock style:

`@mustPayToOtherScript vh d v@`

Reviewer 2: Purescript docs use markdown.

Author: this part is Haskell code.

-- | hash vh alonside a datum d.
-- | If used in OffChain, this constraint creates a script output with 
-- | vh, d and v, and adds d in the 
-- | transaction's datum witness set.
mustPayToOtherScript 

>   :: forall i o. ValidatorHash -> Datum -> Value -> TxConstraints i oSource#

Reviewer: remove `Source#`

give :: ValidatorHash -> Validator -> Contract () TransactionHash
give vhash validator = do
  let
    constraints :: Constraints.TxConstraints Unit Unit
    constraints = Constraints.mustPayToScript vhash unitDatum
      $ Value.lovelaceValueOf
      $ BigInt.fromInt 2_000_000

    lookups :: Lookups.ScriptLookups PlutusData
    lookups = Lookups.validator validator

  buildBalanceSignAndSubmitTx lookups constraints
```

Notice how with the current API offered by CTL we need to provide the
validator as part of the `lookups` by ourselves. 

### The `grab` contract

The Plutus `grab` example takes all the UTxOs locked by 
the on-chain contract that always validates a transaction, and spends 
them to get all in the wallet of the user running the example.
This isn't a problem as the example is intended to run inside a 
Plutus `EmulatorTrace` in a local toy environment.

```Haskell
-- Haskell
grab :: forall w s e. AsContractError e => Contract w s e ()
grab = do
   utxos <- utxoAt scrAddress
   let orefs   = fst <$> Map.toList utxos
      lookups  = Constraints.unspentOutputs utxos      <>
                 Constraints.otherScript validator
      tx :: TxConstraints Void Void

>       tx       = mconcat [mustSpendScriptOutput oref $ Redeemer $ I 17 | oref <- orefs]

Author: this is a copy of the source code, so this should be a thing with the autoformat. I will remove them here aniway.

   ledgerTx <- submitTxConstraintsWith @Void lookups tx
   void $ awaitTxConfirmed $ txId ledgerTx
   logInfo @String $ "collected gifts"
```

To talk about the grab contract in CTL we need to talk about some 
functions and types of CTL first. 

```PureScript
module Plutus.Types.Transaction ... 
.
.
.
type Utxo = Map TransactionInput TransactionOutput
newtype UtxoM = UtxoM Utxo
```

```PureScript
module Contract.Utxos ...
.
.
.

> -- | This module defines query functionality via Ogmios to get utxos. Gets 

Reviewer 2: Please use `UTxO` instead of `utxo` spelling in docs and comments.

I will do the same change to existing docs soon.

> -- | utxos at an (internal) Address in terms of a Plutus Address. 

Reviewer 2: It look like you copy-pasted the docs from generated documentation instead of the code, losing backticks for identifiers.

-- | Results may vary depending on Wallettype. SeeQueryM` for more 
-- | details on wallet variance.
utxosAt :: forall (r :: Row Type). Address -> Contract r (Maybe UtxoM)
```

In the case of the CTL version of `grab`, we cannot use all the UTxOs locked by 
the validator that always validates, since the example is 
intended to run in the `testnet` and other people could have some 
values locked by the script.
This is the reason we assume we have already run the `give` contract to 
pay some `testAda` to the validator first, and then We got a `TransactionHash`.
We would use the `TransactionHash` to locate the right UTxO to spend. 

```PureScript
-- PureScript
grab
  :: ValidatorHash
  -> Validator
  -> TransactionHash
  -> Contract () Unit
grab vhash validator txId = do
  let scriptAddress = scriptHashAddress vhash
  UtxoM utxos <- fromMaybe (UtxoM Map.empty) <$> utxosAt scriptAddress
  case

>     fst <$> find hasTransactionId (Map.toUnfoldable utxos :: Array (_ /\ _))

Author: Right. I still believe that being specific by using`(Array (_ /\ _))` helps to understand the example.

    of
    Just txInput ->
      let
        lookups :: Lookups.ScriptLookups PlutusData
        lookups = Lookups.validator validator
          <> Lookups.unspentOutputs utxos

        constraints :: TxConstraints Unit Unit
        constraints =
          Constraints.mustSpendScriptOutput txInput unitRedeemer
      in
        void $ buildBalanceSignAndSubmitTx lookups constraints
    _ ->
      logInfo' $ "The id "
        <> show txId
        <> " does not have output locked at: "
        <> show scriptAddress
  where
  hasTransactionId :: TransactionInput /\ _ -> Boolean
  hasTransactionId (TransactionInput tx /\ _) =
    tx.transactionId == txId
```

Notice the explicit signature in:

```
  fst <$> find hasTransactionId (Map.toUnfoldable utxos :: Array (_ /\ _))
```

> Since PureScript has JS as the backend, `Arrays` are a data type available as 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since PureScript has JS as the backend, `Array` is the most used container (instead of lists as in Haskell)
```
